---
title: "Predicted Sharing Trends of Online Articles - What did we learn?"
author: "Sneha Karanjai"
date: '2022-10-31'
output: md_document
---

# Predicted Sharing Trends of Online Articles - What did we learn? 
The project objective was to work in a group and create a report that involves predictive modelling and automation of Markdown files. The data used was from UCI Machine Learning Repository of the Online News Popularity dataset and it was filters, analyzed, and predicted by channel. 

# Alternative Approach
The biggest chunk of the project was data analysis. A lot of time was spent in understand which variables to include and not to include in the modelling step. This was particularly difficult because a lot of the variables in the dataset resulted from pre-processing of the articles through natural language processing. Given the scant knowledge in this area, a majority of the time went in understanding what these variables meant and this time was unaccounted for in the project planning. If given a redo, I would account for the time required for domain-analysis. Furthermore,

# Challenges and Hardships 
This was a first-hand experience with the "curse of dimensionality". We started working with 61 explanatory variables which was in itself a task to manage. Understanding the variables and their effect on each other and the target variable which resulted in dimensionality reduction was a critical milestone in the project. 
Additionally, I was extremely accustomed to hard-coding variables, results and outputs. It was a learning and a challenge to consiously ensure that the values were not hard-coded so that they would get proper results for each channel.

# Biggest Takeaways
Here are my biggest takeaways from the project : 
- 80-85% of any Data Science project involves understanding and exploring the data. It is important to dedicate the required time for the preliminary steps before jumping into modelling. This ensures that the models that are chosen and fit align with the dataset at hand. 
- Automation of report generation is an extremely handy tool which when integrated with tools like Shiny dashboards can create powerful, real-time applications. 
- It is important to have conversations with your stakeholders on the battle between interpretability of your model and accuracy. In our case, a PCA with a multiple linear regression was a way better model that any  others chosen. However, involving PCA reduces the interpretability of the models. 
- Sometimes, based on the underlying data a simple model with the right parameter can be superior to a more complex model.

[Here's a link to the Project Repo](https://github.com/mcartron10/Stat558_Project3_CartronKaranjai)

[Here's a link to the Blog Repo ](https://github.com/sneha-k/sneha-k.github.io)



 
